update AWS credential setup docs, consolidate cloud auth docs (#5122)
skypilot-org/skypilot: docs/source/cloud-setup/cloud-permissions/aws.rst

Reviewer: Nit: nested dirs. Can refactor in the future.

.. _aws-sso:

Using AWS SSO
-------------

`AWS IAM Identity Center <https://aws.amazon.com/iam/identity-center/>`_ (Successor to AWS Single Sign-On, or SSO) is supported.

.. _sso-feature-compat:
.. note::
  SSO login has limited functionality *across multiple clouds*. If you use multiple clouds, you can :ref:`set up a dedicated IAM user and access key <dedicated-aws-user>` so that instances launched on other clouds can use AWS resources.

  .. list-table::
     :header-rows: 1
     :stub-columns: 1

     * - *Supported features:*
       - SSO credentials
       - Static credentials
     * - Launch AWS instances with S3 buckets
       - |:white_check_mark:|
       - |:white_check_mark:|
     * - Use S3 buckets from other clouds
       - |:x:|
       - |:white_check_mark:|
     * - Use managed jobs across multiple clouds
       - |:yellow_circle:| [1]_
       - |:white_check_mark:|

  .. [1] To allow managed jobs to run on AWS instances, make sure your controller is also on AWS, by :ref:`specifying the controller resources <jobs-controller-custom-resources>`.

> To use SSO, ensure that your machine `has AWS CLI v2 installed <https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html>`_. By default, ``pip install skypilot[aws]`` installs v1; v2 cannot be installed via pip. If you install v2, you may need to ``deactivate`` (for venv) or ``conda deactivate`` to avoid the v1 CLI taking precedence.

Author: I think this path (/usr/local/aws-cli/) is MacOS-specific, but let me double check.

   .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-add-user.png
       :alt: AWS Add User

   Then, click **Create User** and enter the user's name. Click **Next**.

2. In the **Permissions options** section, select "Attach existing policies directly". Depending on whether you want simplified or minimal permissions, follow the instructions below:

   .. tab-set::

       .. tab-item:: Simplified permissions

           Search for the **AdministratorAccess** policy, and check the box to add it. Click **Next** to proceed.

       .. tab-item:: Minimal permissions

           Click on **Create Policy**.

           .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-create-policy.png
               :alt: AWS Create Policy

           This will open a new window to define the minimal policy. Follow the instructions to create a new policy: :ref:`aws-minimal-policy`.

           Come back to this window, and in the **Permissions policies** box, click on the refresh button. You can now search for the policy you just created.

           .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-add-policy.png
               :alt: AWS Add Policy

>            Check the box to add the policy, and click **Next** to proceed.

Author: Since the instructions here are specific to creating a user, I think we should keep them here. I moved down more of the policy-specific instructions.

3. Click on **Next** and follow the instructions to create the user.

4. Select the newly created user from the dashboard, and go to the **Security credentials** tab. Click on **Create access key**.

   .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-create-access-key.png
       :alt: AWS Create access key

5. For "Use case", select **Other**. Click **Next**, then click **Create access key**.

6. Use the newly created access key to configure your credentials with the AWS CLI:

   .. code-block:: console

>      :emphasize-lines: 9-10

Author: updated

AWS
=====

.. note::

    By default, SkyPilot will use the credentials you have set up locally. For most cases, the :ref:`getting started instructions <aws-installation>` are all you need to do. The steps below are **optional advanced configuration options**, aimed primarily at cloud admins and advanced users.

.. _aws-sso:

Using AWS SSO
-------------

> `AWS IAM Identity Center <https://aws.amazon.com/iam/identity-center/>`_ (Successor to AWS Single Sign-On, or SSO) is supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`AWS IAM Identity Center <https://aws.amazon.com/iam/identity-center/>`_ (successor to AWS Single Sign-On, or SSO) is supported.
```

.. _sso-feature-compat:

SSO login has limited functionality *across multiple clouds*. If you use multiple clouds, you can :ref:`set up a dedicated IAM user and access key <dedicated-aws-user>` so that instances launched on other clouds can use AWS resources.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - *Supported features:*
     - SSO credentials
     - Static credentials
   * - Use S3 buckets on an AWS cluster
     - |:white_check_mark:|
     - |:white_check_mark:|
   * - Use S3 buckets on a cluster in another cloud
     - |:x:|
     - |:white_check_mark:|
   * - Run :ref:`managed jobs <managed-jobs>` across multiple clouds
     - |:yellow_circle:| [1]_
     - |:white_check_mark:|

.. [1] To allow managed jobs to run on AWS instances, make sure your controller is also on AWS, by :ref:`specifying the controller resources <jobs-controller-custom-resources>`.

> 

Reviewer: These are multicloud-related notes. Can we move it down, behind the instructions below? Can even be a subsection, "SSO and Cross-cloud Features"?

Author: I think it's pretty important for SSO users to see that some features won't work, otherwise it will just seem like SkyPilot is broken. We could leave a very short note here and link to a subsection with the details below, though.

   .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-create-access-key.png
       :alt: AWS Create access key

5. For "Use case", select **Other**. Click **Next**, then click **Create access key**.

6. Use the newly created access key to configure your credentials with the AWS CLI:

   .. code-block:: console
     :emphasize-lines: 13-14

     $ # Configure your AWS credentials
     $ aws configure
     AWS Access Key ID [None]: <Access key>
     AWS Secret Access Key [None]: <Secret access key>
     Default region name [None]:
     Default output format [None]:

     $ # Check that AWS sees the shared-credentials-files
     $ aws configure list
           Name                    Value             Type    Location
           ----                    -----             ----    --------
        profile                <not set>             None    None
     access_key     ****************xxxx shared-credentials-file
     secret_key     ****************xxxx shared-credentials-file
         region                <not set>             None    None

     $ # Validate that credentials are working
     $ sky check aws -v

.. _several-aws-profiles:

> Switch profiles or accounts

Reviewer: Pull this up to 2nd subsection? Since this one is lower-lift, potentially user-facing.

How about:
- Using AWS SSO
- Using a specific VPC
- Switching profiles or accounts
- <the rest, admin-facing>

Author: Hmm, I feel that "Using a specific VPC" is probably more admin-facing than "Dedicated SkyPilot IAM user". Anyway, I'm pretty happy with any order as long as SSO is at the top.

Author: Reordered:

- Using AWS SSO
  - Multi-cloud access with SSO login
- Switching profiles or accounts
- Using a specific VPC
- Dedicated SkyPilot IAM user
- Minimal permissions
  - Create a user account with minimal permissions
  - Create the internal IAM role for SkyPilot
  - Minimal IAM policy
- Troubleshooting
  - Common issues

@concretevitamin what do you think?

Reviewer: Sounds good.

> Switch profiles or accounts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Switching profiles or accounts
```

---------------------------

You can use different AWS profiles or accounts to launch different clusters. SkyPilot will remember the owner identity of each cluster and properly protects any "write" operations. All clusters are shown in ``sky status``.

Example of mixing the default profile and another profile:

.. code-block:: console

    $ # A cluster launched under the default AWS identity.
    $ sky launch --cloud aws -c default

    $ # A cluster launched under a different profile.
    $ AWS_PROFILE=AdministratorAccess-12345 sky launch --cloud aws -c other-profile-cluster

> If you are using a :ref:`remote API server <sky-api-server>`, the AWS credentials are configured on the remote server. Overriding ``AWS_PROFILE`` won't work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using a :ref:`remote API server <sky-api-server>`, the AWS credentials are configured on the remote server. Overriding ``AWS_PROFILE`` on the client side won't work.
```

             ----                    -----             ----    --------
          profile                <not set>             None    None
       access_key     ****************xxxx shared-credentials-file
       secret_key     ****************xxxx shared-credentials-file
           region                <not set>             None    None

   If you have SSO credentials set up correctly, you should see something like this:

   .. code-block:: console

       $ aws configure list
             Name                    Value             Type    Location
             ----                    -----             ----    --------
          profile                <not set>             None    None
       access_key     ****************xxxx              sso
       secret_key     ****************xxxx              sso
           region                <not set>             None    None

2. **Check** ``sky check aws``. This should show whether SkyPilot is picking up the credentials and has the necessary permissions.

   .. code-block:: console

       $ sky check aws -v
       Checking credentials to enable clouds for SkyPilot.
         AWS: enabled [compute, storage]

>            Activated account: VRSC9IFFYQI7THCKR5UVC [account=190763068689]

Reviewer: Is this random string already?

Author: yes

       ...

Common issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - **Wrong profile is enabled.** SkyPilot will respect the ``AWS_PROFILE`` environment variable if it is set - see :ref:`several-aws-profiles`. If ``AWS_PROFILE`` is not set, SkyPilot will use the profile named ``default``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Wrong profile is enabled.** SkyPilot will respect the ``AWS_PROFILE`` environment variable if it is set; see :ref:`several-aws-profiles`. If ``AWS_PROFILE`` is not set, SkyPilot will use the profile named ``default``.
```

.. note::

    By default, SkyPilot will use the credentials you have set up locally. For most cases, the :ref:`installation instructions <aws-installation>` are all you need to do. The steps below are **optional advanced configuration options**, aimed primarily at cloud admins and advanced users.

.. _aws-sso:

Using AWS SSO
-------------

`AWS IAM Identity Center <https://aws.amazon.com/iam/identity-center/>`_ (successor to AWS Single Sign-On, or SSO) is supported.

.. note::

>     If you want to use multiple clouds with SkyPilot, check the :ref:`SSO multi-cloud compatibility notes <sso-feature-compat>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you use AWS SSO and multiple clouds, check the :ref:`SSO multi-cloud compatibility notes <sso-feature-compat>`.
```

AWS
=====

.. _aws-sso:

Using AWS SSO
-------------

`AWS IAM Identity Center <https://aws.amazon.com/iam/identity-center/>`_ (Successor to AWS Single Sign-On, or SSO) is supported.

.. warning::

>   SSO login *will not work across multiple clouds*. If you use multiple clouds, you should **LINK ME** :ref:`set up a dedicated user and credentials <dedicated-aws-user>` so that instances launched on other clouds can use AWS resources.

Author: oh I fixed it but forgot to update the LINK ME, thanks

You can use the following to check version:

.. code-block:: console

    $ aws --version
    aws-cli/2.25.6 ...

Visit your SSO login portal (e.g. ``https://my-sso-portal.awsapps.com/start``), and click on **Access keys** under the corresponding account. Under "AWS IAM Identity Center credentials (Recommended)" note:

- the ``SSO start URL``
- the ``SSO Region``

Then, log into your SSO account:

.. code-block:: console

    $ aws configure sso

- **SSO session name**: should be set, but you can choose any name you want.
- **SSO start URL**: copy from the SSO login portal
- **SSO region**: copy from the SSO login portal
- **SSO registration scopes**: leave blank to use the default

Log in and approve the request in your web browser. Then back in the CLI, complete the remaining fields:

- **Default client Region**: optional
- **CLI default output format**: optional
- **Profile name**: set to ``default`` if you want to use this profile by default with SkyPilot, otherwise see :ref:`several-aws-profiles`.

> If everything is set up correctly, :code:`sky check aws` should succeed!

Reviewer 2: We need to emphasize the requirement of setting `AWS_PROFILE` in the env var. Otherwise, it won't work for SkyPilot.

Author: If you follow the instructions to set profile name to `default` (line 46), it's not needed to set AWS_PROFILE. This part is already complicated so I don't want to add too much detail here. I'm adding a troubleshooting section that will include checking AWS_PROFILE.

.. _dedicated-aws-user:

Setting up a dedicated SkyPilot IAM user
----------------------------------------

You can create a dedicated IAM user for SkyPilot, if you can't or don't want to use your normal credentials, or if you want to restrict SkyPilot's permissions.

.. note::

  **SSO users** that login via awsapps.com should set up a dedicated user to ensure cross-cloud access. Otherwise, instances launched in other clouds will not be able to access AWS resources, including buckets and managed jobs.

Follow these steps to create a new AWS user:

1. Open the `IAM dashboard <https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/iamv2/home#/home>`_ in the AWS console and click on the **Users** tab. Then, click **Create User** and enter the user's name. Click **Next**.

> TODO these screenshots are all outdated

Reviewer 3: Flagging this TODO comment

Author: Thanks. Want to make sure this looks good in general then I'll redo all the screenshots at the end, since it's pretty rote.

    .. tab-set::

        .. tab-item:: Simplified permissions

            Search for the **AdministratorAccess** policy, and check the box to add it. Click **Next** to proceed.

        .. tab-item:: Minimal permissions

            Click on **Create Policy**.

            .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-create-policy.png
                :width: 80%
                :align: center
                :alt: AWS Create Policy

            This will open a new window to define the minimal policy.

            Choose "JSON" tab and copy the needed minimal policy rules.
            **See** :ref:`aws-minimal-policy` **for all the policy rules.**

            Click **Next: Tags** and follow the instructions to finish creating the policy. You can give the policy a descriptive name, such as ``minimal-skypilot-policy``.

            Go back to the previous window and click on the refresh button, and you can now search for the policy you just created.

            .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-add-policy.png
                :width: 80%
                :align: center
                :alt: AWS Add Policy

>             Check the box to add the policy, and click **Next** to proceed.

Author: The alternative is that this is outside the numbers, which looks worse IMO.
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bf2ff352-fb97-4fac-b0d2-75b266580259)

I couldn't find a way to make it indented to the same level as the numbers, which would be ideal.

>             Check the box to add the policy, and click **Next** to proceed.

Reviewer 2: IIRC, if you have correct number of spaces for indent, it could show in a different way. If it does not work, I think the non-indent one is ok. The quote looks quite bad to me.

>             Check the box to add the policy, and click **Next** to proceed.

Author: Got it. Need 3 spaces, not 2 or 4 :)

AWS
=====

.. _aws-sso:

Using AWS SSO
-------------

`AWS IAM Identity Center <https://aws.amazon.com/iam/identity-center/>`_ (Successor to AWS Single Sign-On, or SSO) is supported.

.. warning::

>   SSO login *will not work across multiple clouds*. If you use multiple clouds, you should :ref:`set up a dedicated user and credentials <dedicated-aws-user>` so that instances launched on other clouds can use AWS resources.

Author: It can break cross-cloud s3 access as well - e.g. user creates a sky-managed named bucket, and it is created on AWS. Then later a GCP instance will not be able to access that bucket.

To use it, ensure that your machine `has AWS CLI V2 installed <https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html>`_ (by default, ``pip install skypilot[aws]`` installs V1; V2 cannot be installed via pip).

You can use the following to check version:

.. code-block:: console

    $ aws --version

>     aws-cli/2.25.6 ...

Author: Took a stab at adding a potential solution. It's not a great situation though. TBH would be nice if we just avoided depending on aws-cli directly.

Visit your SSO login portal (e.g. ``https://my-sso-portal.awsapps.com/start``), and click on **Access keys** under the corresponding account. Under "AWS IAM Identity Center credentials (Recommended)", copy these values:

- the ``SSO start URL``
- the ``SSO Region``

Then, log into your SSO account:

.. code-block:: console

    $ aws configure sso

- **SSO session name**: should be set, but you can choose any name you want.
- **SSO start URL**: copy from the SSO login portal
- **SSO region**: copy from the SSO login portal
- **SSO registration scopes**: leave blank to use the default

Log in and approve the request in your web browser. Then back in the CLI, complete the remaining fields:

- **Default client Region**: optional
- **CLI default output format**: optional
- **Profile name**: set to ``default`` if you want to use this profile by default with SkyPilot, otherwise see :ref:`several-aws-profiles`.

If everything is set up correctly, :code:`sky check aws` should succeed!

.. _dedicated-aws-user:

> Setting up a dedicated SkyPilot IAM user

Reviewer 2: How about using a shorter title, so as to make sure the right TOC does not wrap? Otherwise, it looks a bit hard to see the structure of the page in that TOC.
```suggestion
Dedicated SkyPilot IAM user
```

----------------------------------------

> You can create a dedicated IAM user for SkyPilot, if you can't or don't want to use your normal credentials, or if you want to restrict SkyPilot's permissions.

Reviewer 2: We should emphasize here that a dedicated user is not needed if `sky check aws` works, and we can put the reason for creating a dedicated IAM user in a itemized list.

.. note::

  **SSO users** that login via awsapps.com should set up a dedicated user to ensure cross-cloud access. Otherwise, instances launched in other clouds will not be able to access AWS resources, including buckets and managed jobs.

Follow these steps to create a new AWS user:

1. Open the `IAM dashboard <https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/iamv2/home#/home>`_ in the AWS console and click on the **Users** tab. Then, click **Create User** and enter the user's name. Click **Next**.

   **TODO: fix screenshots**

   .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-add-user.png
       :width: 80%
       :align: center

>        :alt: AWS Add User

Author: I did experiment with it, but the AWS console is really tall... If we make the images less wide then the text gets really small. I could vertically crop some of them but not all. Tried to keep them the same size, but maybe better to crop each one as much as possible. What do you think?

   .. tab-set::

       .. tab-item:: Simplified permissions

           Search for the **AdministratorAccess** policy, and check the box to add it. Click **Next** to proceed.

       .. tab-item:: Minimal permissions

           Click on **Create Policy**.

           .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-create-policy.png
               :width: 80%
               :align: center
               :alt: AWS Create Policy

           This will open a new window to define the minimal policy.

           Choose "JSON" tab and copy the needed minimal policy rules.
           **See** :ref:`aws-minimal-policy` **for all the policy rules.**

           Click **Next: Tags** and follow the instructions to finish creating the policy. You can give the policy a descriptive name, such as ``minimal-skypilot-policy``.

           Go back to the previous window and click on the refresh button, and you can now search for the policy you just created.

           .. image:: ../../images/screenshots/aws/aws-add-policy.png
               :width: 80%
               :align: center
               :alt: AWS Add Policy

>            Check the box to add the policy, and click **Next** to proceed.

Reviewer 2: Can we move these steps into the `Create a user account with minimal permissions` below and just keep a link here to make it easier to read? Otherwise, it feels to long to scroll down.

Author: I see what you mean.

> move these steps into the `Create a user account with minimal permissions`

That section is reduced significantly because most of the flow is the same for minimal permissions and for simple permissions. It doesn't make sense to move everything into the "Minimal permissions" section because these only apply to user creation, and "Minimal permissions" could apply to both user creation and role creation.

That said, I think this can be better. Will do another pass

3. Click on **Next** and follow the instructions to create the user.

4. Select the newly created user from the dashboard, and go to the **Security credentials** tab.

5. Click on **Create access key**, and for "Use case", select **Other**. Click **Next** , then click **Create access key**.

6. Use the newly created access key to configure your credentials with the AWS CLI:

   .. code-block:: console
     :emphasize-lines: 9-10

     $ # Configure your AWS credentials
     $ aws configure

     $ # Check that AWS sees the shared-credentials-files
     $ aws configure list
           Name                    Value             Type    Location
           ----                    -----             ----    --------
        profile                <not set>             None    None
     access_key     ****************xxxx shared-credentials-file
     secret_key     ****************xxxx shared-credentials-file
         region                <not set>             None    None

     $ # Validate that credentials are working
     $ sky check aws

.. _several-aws-profiles:

> Using several profiles or accounts

Reviewer 2: Same as above: make the TOC title short
```suggestion
Switch profiles or accounts
```

----------------------------------

You can use different AWS profiles or accounts to launch different clusters. SkyPilot will remember the owner identity of each cluster and properly protects any "write" operations. All clusters are shown in ``sky status``.

Example of mixing a default profile and an SSO profile:

.. code-block:: console

    $ # A cluster launched under the default AWS identity.
    $ sky launch --cloud aws -c default

    $ # A cluster launched under a different profile.
    $ AWS_PROFILE=AdministratorAccess-12345 sky launch --cloud aws -c my-sso-cluster

> 

Author: #5229

.. _aws-troubleshooting:

> Troubleshooting issues

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Troubleshooting
```

             ----                    -----             ----    --------
          profile                <not set>             None    None
       access_key     ****************xxxx shared-credentials-file
       secret_key     ****************xxxx shared-credentials-file
           region                <not set>             None    None

   If you have SSO credentials set up correctly, you should see something like this:

   .. code-block:: console

       $ aws configure list
             Name                    Value             Type    Location
             ----                    -----             ----    --------
          profile                <not set>             None    None
       access_key     ****************xxxx              sso
       secret_key     ****************xxxx              sso
           region                <not set>             None    None

2. **Check** ``sky check aws``. This should show whether SkyPilot is picking up the credentials and has the necessary permissions.

   .. code-block:: console

       $ sky check aws
       Checking credentials to enable clouds for SkyPilot.
         AWS: enabled [compute, storage]

>        ...

Reviewer 2: How about using `sky check aws -v` as the first step? It will show what credential is being used and also see if things has been setup.

> **Common issues:**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Common issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

  3. Otherwise, the profile will not be accessible.

  Note that even if there is only one profile, it will not be used unless ``AWS_PROFILE`` is set or the profile is named ``default``.

  In AWS CLI v1, you can check ``~/.aws/credentials`` and ``~/.aws/config`` to look for profile names. In AWS CLI v2, you can check from the CLI.

  .. code-block:: console

      $ # AWS CLI v2 only
      $ aws --version
      aws-cli/2.25.6 ...

      $ # List all profiles
      $ aws configure list-profiles
      AWSPowerUserAccess-xxxxxxx
      default

  If there is no ``default`` profile, you can edit the configuration directly:

  .. code-block:: cfg
      :emphasize-lines: 2

      # ~/.aws/config
      [profile default]
      sso_session = my-skypilot-session
      sso_account_id = XXXXXXXXXX
      ...

  .. code-block:: cfg
      :emphasize-lines: 2

      # ~/.aws/config
      [default]
      aws_access_key_id = XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
      aws_secret_access_key = XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

  Or, you can set the ``AWS_PROFILE`` environment variable in your shell config:

  .. code-block:: shell

      # .bashrc / .zshrc
      export AWS_PROFILE='AWSPowerUserAccess-xxxxxxx'

> 

Reviewer 2: We may want to add an API server item here for switching account issue with a remote API server. As discussed offline, we can fix the local API server for taking in `env_vars` starts with `AWS_`
